= RubyCLI

Author:: {Martin Velez}[http://www.martinvelez.com]
Copyright:: Copyright (c) 2011 Martin Velez
License:: Distributed under the same terms as Ruby

== Description 

"RubyCLI" is a Ruby library which factors out the code needed to create Ruby 
programs with a command line interface (CLI) and that follow the Unix Philosophy 
design method outlined in http://www.faqs.org/docs/artu/ch01s06.html.

Currently, RubyCLI is short and simple. It uses Ruby's core 
optparse[http://ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/optparse/rdoc/index.html] library.

== Design

What does a command line application library need to do?
1. Provide a user interface (UI)
   * Process options (use Ruby's Option Parser)
   * Process arguments
2. Pass options and arguments as parameters to other functions defined in libraries or other executables.

What does a command line application library need not do?
1. Validate options or arguments. 
   * Libraries or other executables should do this.

This is the core algorithm of any Ruby CLI application
 def run
   if parse_options? && arguments_Valid?
     process_options
     process_arguments
     output_options_and_arguments# def run
     command
   else
     output_help(1)
   end
 end

== Installation

Rubygems:
 gem install ruby_cli

Not Rubygems:
1. use only files in lib folder
2. Use the RubyCLI module as a mixin for your CLI application

== Alternative Tools

There are other tools out there which can be used to write command line 
applications. 

1. clamp[http://github.com/mdub/clamp] - I don't like to learn new DSLs
2. optparse[http://ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/optparse/rdoc/index.html] - This library uses this to parse options.
3. Thor[http://github.com/wycats/thor] - It does not try to follow the Unix Philosophy.
4. Clip[http://clip.rubyforge.org/] - OptionParser already exists.

== Usage

1. New File
2. Require the ruby_cli gem.
3. Create a Ruby class. 
4. Call it "App", for example.  
5. Include the RubyCLI module.
6. Define the command method.
   * This is where your program does the actual work.  
   * At this point you have options and arguments available.
   * Pass them as parameters to library functions or as options/arguments to other executables.
   * Be smart!  Have libraries and other executables do the heavy work.  
   * Be smart!  Fewer lines of code (LOC) here is an indication that your code will be easy to maintain.
7. Define command options and defaults (optional)
   * This is where you define a hash for your options and set the default values.
   * Remember, options by definition are optional.
8. Define command arguments and defaults (optional)

== Usage Example 1

This example demonstrates how to use RubyCLI to create a command line application. 

 #!/usr/bin/ruby

 require 'ruby_cli'

 class App
   include RubyCLI  

 def command
   puts "hello world"
 end

 end

 if __FILE__ == $0
   app = App.new(ARGV) 
   app.run
 end

== Usage Example 2

This example demonstrates how command specific options can be defined easily using
RubyCLI.  It is taken from the ruby_ngrams gem executable, which I also
authored.  
 
 #!/usr/bin/env ruby

 require 'ruby_cli'
 require 'ruby_ngrams'

 class App
   include RubyCLI  

   def initialize_command_options() @options = {:regex => //, :n => 2}  end

   def define_command_option_parsing
     @opt_parser.on('-n', '--n NUM', Integer, 'set length n for n-grams') do |n|
       @options[:n] = n
     end
     @opt_parser.on('-r', '--regex "REGEX"', Regexp, 'set regex to split string into tokens') do |r|
       @options[:regex] = r
     end
   end

   def command
     # If arguments were provided, then they have to be names of files.
     # These files will be handled using Ruby's ARGF builtin variable.
     # If arguments are not filenames, then this application will produce a 
     # a runtime error informing the user that the given file could not be opened.

     # ARGF is a stream designed for use in scripts that process files given as 
     #  command-line arguments or passed in via STDIN.
     # The arguments passed to your script are stored in the ARGV Array, 
     #  one argument per element. ARGF assumes that any arguments that aren’t 
     # filenames have been removed from ARGV.
     text = ARGF.read
     text.ngrams(@options).each { |ngram| puts ngram.inspect }
   end
 end

 app = App.new(ARGV, __FILE__)
 app.run

= Dependencies

* Ruby 1.8.7 or greater
* None other

== Acknowledgements

{Todd Werth}[http://blog.toddwerth.com/entries/5]
* I used his Ruby command line application skeleton code.  I borrowed some ideas from there.

== TODO

* ?

== Development

=== Source Repository
ruby_cli is hosted on Github at: 
 https://github.com/martinvelez/ruby_cli
 
=== Issues and Bug Reports
Get help, request features, and reports bugs here:
 https://github.com/martinvelez/ruby_cli/issues
